[PGSQL] ADR on PGSQL flags update concurrency control mechanism (#1867)
apache/james-project: src/adr/0072-postgresql-flags-update-concurrency-control.md

# 72.  Postgresql flags update concurrency control mechanism

Date: 2023-12-19

## Status

Not-Implemented

## Context

> When IMAP server support THREAD_SAFE_FLAGS_UPDATE capability, it means that the server can update flags concurrently.

Reviewer: No. We do not get the choice.

To get a working IMAP server we need to support concurrency races upon flag updates and get a decent behaviour.

Currently, the James fetches the current data, performs changes, and then updates to database.
However, this approach does not ensure thread safety and may lead to concurrency issues.

> Considering a re-implementation of the logic with a semantic alignment to CRDT (conflict-free replicated data types) principles.
> This alternative explores a different paradigm for addressing concurrency challenges without resorting to traditional transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CRDT (conflict-free replicated data types) principles semantic can lay the ground to solving concurrency issues in a lock-free manner, and could thus be used for the problem at hand. This explores a different paradigm for addressing concurrency challenges without resorting to traditional transactions.
```

However, this may increase the complexity of the code and require careful management of data versions.
The chosen solution using PostgreSQL functions was preferred for its simplicity and direct support for array operations.

- Read-Then-Write Logic into Transactions: Transactions come with associated costs, including extra locking, coordination overhead, 
and dependency on connection pooling. By avoiding the use of transactions, we aim to reduce these potential drawbacks 
and explore other mechanisms for ensuring data consistency.

- Semantic Alignment with CRDT Principles: Considering a re-implementation of the logic with a semantic alignment to CRDT (commutative replicated data types) principles.

> This alternative explores a different paradigm for addressing concurrency challenges without resorting to traditional transactions.

Reviewer: Move this into context. This is some context we did draw inspiration from...
